Q.1: Rasheed got a playing top (lattu) as his birthday present, which surprisingly had no colour on it. He wanted to colour it with his crayons. The top is shaped like a cone surmounted by a hemisphere (see Fig 13.6). The entire top is 5 cm in height and the diameter of the top is 3.5 cm. Find the area he has to colour. (Take π = 22/7)
Q. 2: Mayank made a bird-bath for his garden in the shape of a cylinder with a hemispherical depression at one end as shown in the figure. The height of the cylinder is 1.45 m and its radius is 30 cm. Find the total surface area of the bird-bath. (Take π = 22/7)
Q. 3: 2 cubes each of volume 64 cm3 are joined end to end. Find the surface area of the resulting cuboid.
Q. 4: A tent is in the shape of a cylinder surmounted by a conical top. If the height and diameter of the cylindrical part are 2.1 m and 4 m respectively, and the slant height of the top is 2.8 m, find the area of the canvas used for making the tent. Also, find the cost of the canvas of the tent at the rate of Rs 500 per m2. (Note that the base of the tent will not be covered with canvas.)
Q. 5: A solid toy is in the form of a hemisphere surmounted by a right circular cone. The height of the cone is 2 cm and the diameter of the base is 4 cm. Determine the volume of the toy. If a right circular cylinder circumscribes the toy, find the difference between the volumes of the cylinder and the toy. (Take π = 3.14)
Q. 6: A spherical glass vessel has a cylindrical neck 8 cm long, 2 cm in diameter; the diameter of the spherical part is 8.5 cm. By measuring the amount of water it holds, a child finds its volume to be 345 cm3. Check whether she is correct, taking the above as the inside measurements, and π = 3.14.
Q. 7: A cone of height 24 cm and radius of base 6 cm is made up of modelling clay. A child reshapes it in the form of a sphere. Find the radius of the sphere.
Q. 8: Selvi’s house has an overhead tank in the shape of a cylinder. This is filled by pumping water from a sump (an underground tank) which is in the shape of a cuboid. The sump has dimensions 1.57 m × 1.44 m × 95cm. The overhead tank has its radius 60 cm and height 95 cm. Find the height of the water left in the sump after the overhead tank has been completely filled with water from the sump which had been full. Compare the capacity of the tank with that of the sump. (Use π = 3.14)
Q. 9: Metallic spheres of radii 6 cm, 8 cm and 10 cm, respectively, are melted to form a single solid sphere. Find the radius of the resulting sphere.
Q. 10: An open metal bucket is in the shape of a frustum of a cone, mounted on a hollow cylindrical base made of the same metallic sheet as shown in the figure. The diameters of the two circular ends of the bucket are 45 cm and 25 cm, the total vertical height of the bucket is 40 cm and that of the cylindrical base is 6 cm. Find the area of the metallic sheet used to make the bucket, where we do not take into account the handle of the bucket. Also, find the volume of water the bucket can hold. (Take π = 22/7/)
Q. 11: A cylindrical pencil sharpened at one edge is the combination of(A) a cone and a cylinder(B) frustum of a cone and a cylinder(C) a hemisphere and a cylinder(D) two cylinders.
Q. 12: A canal is 300 cm wide and 120 cm deep. The water in the canal is flowing at a speed of 20 km/h. How much area will it irrigate in 20 minutes if 8 cm of standing water is desired?
